CANCER OF THE CERVIX
Introduction

The second most common malignancy and the leading cause of death among women in developing countries. Seventy-five percent of the patients present in advanced stages; lack of organized screening programmes for detection of
the preclinical stages in many countries contributes to the late presentation.
Two age groups with highest incidence: 35 - 40 years; 45 - 55 years
Aetiology
Human papilloma virus (HPV) infection. The infection is usually acquired through sexual intercourse.

RISK FACTORS FOR CANCER OF THE CERVIX 
Risk factors:
Early sexual exposure or multiple sexual partners
A promiscuous male partner
History of sexually transmitted infections particularly Human Papilloma Virus infection; Herpes simplex type 2; chlamydia trachomatis
Early first child birth
High parity
Low socio-economic status
Smoking
Micronutrient deficiency.
Poor sexual hygiene

CLINICAL FEATURES OF CANCER OF THE CERVIX 
Clinical Features
May be asymptomatic. (Picked up in the early stage by routine PAP smear screening)
Abnormal vaginal bleeding: Post-coital, Contact, Spontaneous or Inter-menstrual
Anaemia is a common feature of advanced cases.
Post-menopausal Vaginal discharge. In advanced disease, the discharge is offensive. Pyometria with uterine enlargement may also occur
Haemorrhagic, ulcerative or fungating lesion on the cervix, with extension to the vagina wall in advanced stages.
Vesico-vaginal fistula and/or recto-vaginal fistula in advanced stages

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES OF CANCER OF THE CERVIX 
Differential Diagnoses
Endometrial cancer, endometrial hyperplasia, endometrial polyps, cervicitis, cervical polyps, cervical erosion
Vaginal lesions: vaginitis, vaginal malignancy
Iatrogenic vaginal/uterine bleeding: hormonal drugs and IUCD in-situ,
Blood disorders: bleeding dyscrasias, leukaemia

INVESTIGATIONS OF CANCER OF THE CERVIX 
Investigations
FBC
Urinalysis
Blood Group
Electrolytes and Urea,
Liver function tests
Midstream urine specimen for microscopy, culture and sensitivity;
Chest radiograph
HIV screening.
Intravenous urography

TREATMENT OF CANCER OF THE CERVIX 
Treatment
■ Examination Under Anaesthesia
  · Staging and Biopsy
· Treatment of invasive carcinoma of the cervix can be:
  · Surgery
  · Radiotherapy
  · Surgery plus radiotherapy
  · Chemo-radiation

Stages I to IIA
■ Surgery or radiotherapy (as primary modes of treatment respectively)
  · Radiotherapy can be used as primary mode of treatment in all stages of the disease

Follow up
■ This is for life. Regular cytology of vault smears for early detection and prompt treatment of recurrence.

Prevention
Adequate screening programmes:
■ Regular Papanicolaou smear screening,
■ Visual inspection of the cervix after acetic acid lavage (VIA). Or Visual inspection of the cervix with lugol iodine (VIL).
■ HPV vaccines.
■ Avoidance of multiple sexual partners