CARDIAC DISEASE IN PREGNANCY 
Introduction
A rare but potentially serious clinical entity. Occurs in about 1 – 4% of all pregnancies. Incidence and prevalence of all heart disease varies from place to place. Rheumatic heart disease is more commonly found in less affluent societies while congenital heart disease now accounts for approximately 50% of cardiac diseases in pregnancy in the UK.

Types :
· Preexisting Cardiovascular diseases:
  · Chronic hypertension.
  · Rheumatic heart disease.
  · Congenital heart disease-VSD,ASD & PDA
  · Ischaemic heart disease.
· Cardiovascular disorder acquired during pregnancy:
  · Hypertensive disorder of pregnancy
  · Gestational Hypertension
  · Preeclampsia/ Eclampsia denovo.
  · Preeclampsia superimposed on chronic Hypertension
  · Peripartum Cardiomyopathy
  · Acute myocardial infarction
  · Arrhythmias
    · Thromboembolic Diseases
    · Congenital heart disease that has been corrected.

CLINICAL FEATURES OF CARDIAC DISEASE IN PREGNANCY 
Clinical Features
Severity of heart disease in pregnancy
The New York Heart Association Guidelines (1965) is used.
Relies on the cardiac response to physical activity; may not bear any relationship to the extent of the lesion present
■ Class 1: No limitation of physical activity
■ Class 2: Slight to moderate limitation of physical activity: ordinary day-to-day activities cause dyspnoea
■ Class 3: Marked limitation of activity. Minimal exertion causes dyspnoea
■ Class 4: Symptoms at rest; unable to carry out any physical activity without dyspnoea; orthopnoea may be present

Others:
■ Palpitations
■ Nasal stuffiness
■ Dizziness; light headedness; syncope
■ Epigastric or sub-xiphoid pain; bloating, heartburn
■ Heat intolerance, sweating and flushing
■ Plethoric facies
■ Oedema (legs; occasionally hands and face); Varicose veins
■ Bounding pulses and capillary pulsations
■ Capillary telangiectasia Prominent jugular venous pulsations
■ Lateral displacement of cardiac apex
■ Sinus tachycardia; ectopic beats, Third heart sound
■ Widely split S and S heart sounds1, Murmurs
■ Crepitations

INVESTIGATIONS OF CARDIAC DISEASE IN PREGNANCY 
Investigations
■ Echocardiography (Doppler)
■ Electrocardiography
■ Plethymography
■ CT scan,
■ Cardiac catherization
■ Pulmonary artery catherization
■ Serial blood cultures (if infective endocarditis is suspected)
■ FBC
■ Serum Electrolyte, Urea and Creatinine
■ Urinalysis
■ Blood Glucose
· Bedside crude clotting time
■ Chest radiograph is better avoided in pregnancy

TREATMENT OF CARDIAC DISEASE IN PREGNANCY 
Treatment
Pre-pregnancy
· Fully evaluate patient in conjunction with a cardiologist
· Surgically correct any defect that is amenable
- Counsel on the following points:
  - Risk of maternal death
  - Possible reduction of maternal life expectancy
  - Risk of foetus developing congenital heart disease; foetal growth restriction
  - Possibility of pre-term labour
  - Need for frequent hospital attendance; possible admission
  - Need for intensive maternal and foetal monitoring in labour

Antenatal Care:
■ Joint management with the cardiologist
■ Extreme vigilance: most features of cardiac failure are present in pregnancy
■ Watch out for respiratory tract infection or urinary tract infection and treat aggressively
■ Watch out for anaemia, obesity and multiple gestations for intensive care.
■ Intensive care also required when other medical or psychological conditions co-exist.
- Examination:
  - Ankle and sacral oedema
  - Pulse rate and rhythm
  - Blood pressure
  - Jugular venous pressure
  - Basal crepitations
  - Symphysio-fundal height (SFH) measurement.
  - Competent dental care: Full inspection, Advise on oral hygiene, Dental treatment e.g. tooth extraction should be done under antibiotic cover to prevent infective endocarditis

Supportive Measures
■ Elastic stockings or tights to prevent pooling of blood in the veins of the lower limb
- Indicated for example in patients with congenital heart disease, with pulmonary hypertension; artificial valve replacement; those with atrial fibrillation
■ Heparin safer in pregnancy; warfarin is teratogenic
■ Termination of pregnancy and sterilization may be necessary
■ Best option in severe debilitating cases

Congestive Cardiac Failure
■ Manage as if non-pregnant (in conjunction with a cardiologist)
■ Foetal surveillance:
  - Ultrasound scan particularly for cardiac anomaly at 22 weeks
- Delivery:
  - Either for maternal or foetal indications.
  - Cardiac surgery in pregnancy if indicated

Management of labour in women with cardiac disease
■ Avoid induction of labour if possible
■ Prophylactic antibiotics to prevent bacterial endocarditis
■ Careful fluid balance  
■ Avoid the supine position  
■ Epidural anaesthesia by a senior anaesthetist  
■ Shorten 2 stage with low cavity forceps delivery  
■ Oxytocin for third stage; ergometrine is contraindicated  
■ Oxygen should be available and used if needed  
Complications  
■ Maternal  
  · Mortality: 25 - 50% in Eisenmenger's syndrome; 5% in tetralogy of  
    Fallot; 1% in rheumatic heart disease  
  · Congestive cardiac failure: Greatest risk in the immediate post-partum  
    period  
■ Foetal  
■ Rheumatic heart disease: Intrauterine growth restriction; Pre-term delivery,  
  Cyanotic congenital heart disease, Poor outcomes; up 40% foetal loss  
■ Uncorrected coarctation of aorta: Foetal growth restriction in > 10% of  
  cases, Pre-maturity, Small for gestation age, Intrauterine growth restriction,  
  Intrauterine foetal death, 10 - 15% chance of baby having congenital heart  
  disease  


ECLAMPSIA   
Introduction  
The occurrence of generalized convulsions, associated with signs of pre-  
eclampsia during pregnancy, labour, or within 42 days of delivery. Referred to  
as atypical eclampsia if it occurs in the absence of high blood pressure and after  
7 days post-partum.  
Incidence is widely variable. Worldwide range reported to be 1 in 100 - 1 in  
3,448 pregnancies in Nigeria, it is commoner among un-booked patients.  
Aetiology  
Not exactly known; Its precursor is pre-eclampsia. A disease of primigravidae  
or multigravidae with pregnancy for a new consort.  

CLINICAL FEATURES OF ECLAMPSIA 
Clinical Features  
■ Generalized tonic-clonic seizures, usually heralded by:  
■ Headaches  
■ Dizziness and blurring of vision  
■ Nausea and vomiting  
■ Epigastric pain  
■ Rapidly progressive oedema.  
■ Exaggerated tendon reflexes.  
■ Oliguria  
■ Hypertension.  
■ Worsening proteinuria 

COMPLICATIONS OF ECLAMPSIA 
Complications  
■ Maternal  
■ Cerebral haemorrhage  
■ Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy  
■ High temperature  
■ Renal failure  
■ Aspiration pneumonitis  
■ Cardiopulmonary failure  
■ Liver dysfunction (as in HELLP syndrome)  
■ Fatality  
· Foetal  
  · Prematurity  
  · Intrauterine growth restriction.  
  · Intrauterine foetal death.  
  · Foetal brain damage  

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES OF ECLAMPSIA 
Differential Diagnoses  
■ Idiopathic epilepsy: sometimes accompanied by transient proteinuria  
■ Cerebral malaria: sometimes accompanied by hypertension and albuminuria  
■ Pneumococcal meningitis  
■ Hyper and/or hypo-glycaemia, particularly among diabetics.  
■ Terminal phase of severe anaemia and hepatic failure.  
■ Severe infections and septicaemia.  
■ Uraemia  
■ Brain tumours or abscesses  
■ Cerebral haemorrhage  
■ Poisoning (accidental or intentional)  

INVESTIGATIONS OF ECLAMPSIA 
Investigations  
■ Full blood count  
■ Haemoglobin genotype, Platelet count, Blood Group  
■ Serum Urea and Electrolytes; Creatinine  
■ Liver function tests  
■ Urinalysis  
■ Bed side clotting time  

TREATMENT OF ECLAMPSIA 
Treatment  
■ Manage in conjunction with the physician  

Treatment Goals  
■ Stabilise the patient  
■ Deliver foetus by the safest and most expeditious route  
■ Prevent complications  

Stabilization:  
■ Control (and prevent further) fits  
■ Control blood pressure  
■ Maintain the airway  
■ Ensure adequate urinary output  
■ Monitor  
■ Controlling fits  
■ Best drug is magnesium sulphate  
Intravenous infusion of magnesium sulphate:
■ Loading dose: 4 g by slow intravenous injection over a period not less than 5
  minutes (preferably over 10 - 15 minutes)
■ Maintenance: 10 g in 1 litre of sodium chloride 0.9%, given by intravenous
  infusion at a rate of 1 g per hour
The intramuscular magnesium sulphate (Pritchard) regimen:
■ Loading dose: 4 g by slow intravenous injection over a period not less than 5
  minutes, then 10 g intramuscularly, 5 g by deep intramuscular injection into
  each buttock
■ Maintenance therapy: 5 g by deep intramuscular injection, 2.5 g in each
  buttock every 4 hours
In either case continue for 24 hours after last convulsion, or delivery.
NB:
■ Magnesium sulphate (see details below) Treatment packs are contained in
  cardboard boxes containing magnesium sulphate for the loading dose, 24
  hour maintenance therapy and treatment of one (recurrent) convulsion.
  Syringes, swabs, drip sets and fluids also contained in treatment packs.;
■ Calcium gluconate should always be available to manage toxicity
Alternative means of seizure control
■ Intravenous diazepam -10 mg stat to abort seizures or prevent fits during
  examination; then
■ Intravenous infusion of glucose 5% in water with 40 mg of diazepam added,
  and titrated against the patient's level of consciousness
Recurrent convulsions
■ Magnesium sulphate
  · 2 - 4 g intravenously over 5minutes
  · Give lower dose (2 g) if the patient is small and/or weight is less than 70 kg
Monitoring during magnesium sulphate therapy
■ Continue with intravenous infusion or give the next intramuscular dose
  only if
  · Patellar reflexes are normal
  · Respiratory rate is > 16 cycles/minute
  · Urine output is > 25 mL/hour (or > 100 mL in 4 hours)
■ Consider reducing the dose if
  · Renal function is impaired
  · Respiratory depression occurs
  · Urine output is < 100 mL in 4 hours
  · More frequent monitoring is required in the first two hours on
    intravenous therapy
Magnesium toxicity
Absent patellar reflexes:
■ Stop magnesium sulphate treatment
■ Administer oxygen by face mask
■ Administer 1 g calcium gluconate by slow intravenous injection.

If respiratory rate is abnormal stop further magnesium sulphate
If there are no respiratory abnormalities or abnormal patellar reflexes reduce the dose by half.

Respiratory arrest:

Stop magnesium sulphate treatment
Intubate and ensure ventilation (manage with the anaesthetist)
Calcium gluconate 1 g by slow intravenous injection.

Control of blood pressure:

Intravenous hydralazine

5 mg bolus slowly over 15 minutes, stat
Further boluses can be given every 20 – 30 minutes as long as diastolic blood pressure is 110 mg and above

Or:
Labetalol
20 mg intravenously as a bolus
Repeat after 15 – 20 minutes (if need be, increasing the doses)

The airway:

Intermittent suction of the nostrils and oropharynx
Insert an airway

Urinary output:
In-dwelling Foley's catheter for strict fluid input and output monitoring.

Monitoring:
Quarter-hourly vital signs
Record any further fits

Delivery
Induction of labour

This is the first option if the cervix is favourable, particularly if the patient is not yet in established labour
Can be done by the use of escalating doses of oxytocin infusion or with misoprostol tablets

Elective forceps delivery
Should be done if patient is in the second stage to reduce the stress and cardiovascular changes, especially peaks of elevated blood pressure that accompany expulsive efforts at this stage in labour

Emergency Caesarean section is indicated when:

Cervix is unfavourable for induction
There is foetal distress
Patient is unconscious (unless delivery is imminent)
Vaginal delivery is unlikely within 6 – 8 hours from the onset of the first eclamptic fit and there is an obstetric indication for a Caesarean section

Post-partum
Continue parenteral anticonvulsant for another 24 hours after delivery (or after last seizure), whichever comes first

Prevention
Adequate antenatal, intrapartum and postpartum care.
Early detection of pregnancy-induced hypertension.
Aggressive management.
■ This is the 'gold standard' towards achieving good foetal and maternal outcomes

Re-occurrence
• Occurs in 15.6% of cases
■ Adequate counselling on the need for early booking, regular antenatal clinic attendance and hospital delivery in subsequent deliveries required.