CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE (CKD)
Introduction:
CKD is defined as a structural and functional abnormality of the kidneys
persisting for 3 months or more and manifesting as markers of kidney damage
or reduction in glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Markers of kidney damage
include persistent microalbuminuria or overt albuminuria or haematuria.
Structural abnormalities include abnormalities on imaging or on histology.
CKD is also defined as GFR less than 60ml/min or presence of markers of
kidney disease for 3 months or more.
CKD is quite common in clinical practice as 12-26% of Nigerians have covert
or overt CKD as revealed in community studies
Markers of kidney disease include:
・ Persistent proteinuria - Dipstick positive proteinuria or microalbuminuria
・ Persistent Haematuria - by dipstick and/or urine microscopy
・ Abnormal renal imaging - by various techniques such as ultrasonography,
Computerised Tomography Scan, intravenous urography or plain
radiograph, renal scintigraphy.
・ Abnormal renal histology


STAGING OF CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE AND DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA 

# Table 8.2: Staging of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)

| Stage | Description | GFR (ml/min/1.73m²) |
|---|---|---|
| 1 | Kidney damage with normal or increased GFR | ≥90 (with kidney damage) |
| 2 | Kidney damage with mild decrease in GFR | 60 – 89 |
| 3a | Mild to Moderate decrease in GFR | 45 – 59 |
| 3b | Moderate to severe decrease in GFR | 30 – 44 |
| 4 | Severe decrease in GFR | 15 – 29 |
| 5 | Kidney failure | <15 (or dialysis) |

CLINICAL FEATURES OF CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE 
Clinical Features
・ Asymptomatic
・ Younger patients may present with peri-orbital swelling early in the disease
process
・ Swelling which may then progressively worsen over time and lead to
ascites and anasarca.
・ Hypertension develops in majority of patients with co-existing Congestive
cardiac failure or cerebrovascular disease.
・ Reduction in urine output (oliguria)
・ Features of uraemia: Gastrointestinal system - nausea, vomiting, hiccups,
diarrhoea, epigastric pain and rarely haematemesis.
・ Chest: central chest pain of pericarditis or breathlessness with development
of pulmonary oedema.
・ Central nervous system: Tremors, derangement of sleep rhythm,
drowsiness, seizures and stupor or coma.
・ Skin: Dryness and pruritus
・ Haemopoietic system: Anaemia (pallor) and bleeding diathesis
Diagnostic criteria
See definition and table 8.1
Differential Diagnoses
・Severe acute kidney injury with cortical necrosis
・ Poisoning with multiple organ involvement.
・ Chronic Congestive cardiac failure (Cardio-renal syndrome)

COMPLICATIONS OF CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE 
Complications
・ Anaemia
・ CKD Mineral and Bone Disease
・ Congestive cardiac failure
・ Cerebrovascular disease
・ Peripheral vascular disease
・ Malnutrition

INVESTIGATIONS OF CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE 
Investigations
・ Urine Examination (Volume / microscopy /Urinalysis / Electrolytes);
Serum chemistry (e.g. creatinine, urea, K):
- Allow estimation of GFR using various formulae and staging of the
CKD
- For planning or initiation of renal replacement therapy
- To monitor treatment outcomes or improvement.
・Haematology including serology:
- To assess the full blood count, clotting profile and monitor response to
treatment with oral or parenteral iron and erythropoietin stimulating
agents
- Serological tests for HBV, HCV and HIV are necessary to be able to
isolate infectious patients while applying general precautions in the
management of all patients.
・Imaging (e.g. USS, IVU, RUCG etc.):
- Renal ultrasonography remains the simplest non-invasive diagnostic
tool for patients with CKD.
- Provides information on size, shape, preservation of cortical thickness
and cortico-medullary differentiation as well as echogenicity of the
kidneys, which are usually deranged in patients with advanced CKD.
- Other structural abnormalities like polycystic kidney disease or
hydronephrosis may be discovered and may suggest need for other
imaging modalities particularly in patients with obstructive uropathy.
・Renal biopsy
- Renal biopsy is mandatory in patients that present with some
conditions. These include
- Any evidence of glomerular disease
- Nephrotic range proteinuria
- Sub-nephrotic range proteinuria with or without haematuria
- RBC cast
- Presence of persistent microscopic haematuria
- Suspicion of connective tissue disease
- Presence of familial type of nephrotic syndrome
- Determine the prognosis and response to therapy.

TREATMENT OF ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY 
Treatment Goals
・ Counselling to discourage use of nephrotoxins in whatever form and ensure
good compliance.
・ Good Blood Pressure control.
・ Reduction of proteinuria and ensuring maximum renoprotection
・ Maintenance of fluid homeostasis
・ Control of biochemical abnormalities
・ Maintenance of nutrition
・ Maintenance of haemoglobin between 11-12g/L
・ Maintenance of normal calcium-phosphate homeostasis
・ Treatment of any complicating infection
・ Treat the underlying cause (more useful if discovered early)
・ Dialysis where indicated

Treatment
・ Stage the disease
- Take appropriate measures depending on the stage:
- Stage 1 – 2: Where the cause of CKD is known, treat underlying cause
and institute measures to retard progression.
- Stage 1-2: Where cause is unknown, refer to Nephrologist.
- Stage 3-5: Refer to Nephrologist.
・ Treatment of hypertension:
Combination of different groups of antihypertensive drugs is the rule but
should include maximal doses of either ACEI or ARBs to achieve target BP.
Blood Pressure Targets:
- Proteinuria < 1 g/24 hours -------- 130/80 mmHg
- Proteinuria >1 g/24 hours -------- 120/75 mmHg
- CKD with diabetes -------- 120/75 mmHg
- In children -------- Less than 9t0h percentile for the age, sex and height.
・Anaemia is the commonest haematological complication of CKD and
worsens with deterioration of renal function. All CKD patients should be
screened for anaemia at time of diagnosis and thereafter, at least every 3
months.
- Targets for anaemia treatment:
- Predialysis: Hb - 11 – 12 g/dl, serum ferritin 100-500 ng/ml, TSAT ≥
20%
- Dialysis: Hb - 11 – 12 g/dl, serum ferritin 200 – 500 ng/ml, TSAT ≥ 20%
- In all patients, avoid Hb level > 13 g/dl because of risk of
haemoconcentration and its effect on morbidity and increased
cardiovascular mortality.
Treatment of anaemia:
・ In predialysis patients and patients receiving peritoneal dialysis or home
haemodialysis, optimize iron balance before epoetin therapy using oral
iron. If poor response (TSAT is < 20% and serum ferritin < 100 ng/ml for 4
weeks), switch to parenteral iron.
- Dose of oral iron: Ferrous sulphate 200 mg or ferrous gluconate 600 mg
three times daily (approx. 65mg elemental iron) or 2-6 mg /kg /day of
elemental iron for paediatric patients
- Dose of parenteral iron: Iron sucrose intravenously 200 mg weekly for
5 weeks (total of 1000 mg) or Iron dextran intravenously 250 mg
weekly for 4 weeks. For patients in whom adherence may be difficult,
total dose infusion should be considered as it has been found to be
effective and safe.
・For patients on in-center haemodialysis, start with parenteral iron at 100 mg in
the last 30-60 minutes of the dialysis session to a total of 1000 mg. In cases
of poor or inadequate dialysis, higher doses may be given to ensure
achieving 1000 mg within 4 weeks.
- Test dose of iron dextran should be administered before the full dose.
- For patients that have received blood transfusions, check iron stores
(serum ferritin) before giving supplemental iron because of risk of iron
overload.
・Erythropoiesis Stimulating Agents (ESAs)
- These should be administered preferably after iron deficiency has been
corrected and BP controlled.
· Short-acting ESAs – erythropoetin alpha and erythropoetin beta.
· Intermediate-acting ESAs – darbepoetin alfa
· Long-acting ESAs – CERA
・ Control of biochemical abnormalities
- To maintain good calcium phosphate homeostasis:
- Dietary phosphate intake should be limited in patients with
hyperphosphataemia. Phosphate-binding agents are required in the
treatment of hyperphosphataemia.
- For choice of phosphate binder, it is reasonable to take into account the
following:
- Serum calcium
- CKD stage,
- Presence of other components of CKD-MBD
- Concomitant therapies
- Side-effect profile of the drug.
- The dose of calcium-based phosphate binders should be restricted
in the presence of arterial calcification and/or adynamic bone
disease. In such instances the use of non-calcium based phosphate
binders (e.g. Sevelamer HCl, lanthanum carbonate etc) could be
used.
- Hypocalcaemia, is treated with calcium salts and active vitamin D
analogues. Calcium intake should however, be restricted in patients
with hypercalcemia, soft tissue calcification, low PTH and in
patients with adynamic bone disease.
- Calcitriol or vitamin D analogs, or calcimimetics, or a combination
of calcimimetics and calcitriol or vitamin D analogs may be used to
lower PTH to two to nine times the upper normal limit for the assay
in treated patients.
- Parathyroidectomy is indicated when medical therapy fails.
・Dialysis
– Maintenance Haemodialysis (HD) (Twice or Thrice weekly HD),
– Continuous Ambulatory Peritoneal Dialysis (CAPD)
- See indications for dialysis above under AKI
・Kidney Transplantation.