CORONAVIRUS DISEASE (COVID-19)
Introduction
Covid -19 is a viral illness caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-COV-2).
One of seven coronaviruses known to cause disease in humans. Declared a
pandemic by WHO in 2019.
Other common diseases due to coronaviruses include: severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) and middle east respiratory syndrome (MERS)
Transmission
・ From both symptomatic and asymptomatic people
・ By close contact through respiratory droplets or by direct contact with
infected persons, or by contact with contaminated objects and surfaces, or
・ By aerosols, i.e., in enclosed spaces indoors, crowded and inadequately
ventilated spaces, or
・ During aerosol-generating procedures

CLINICAL FEATURES OF CORONAVIRUS DISEASE (COVID-19)
Clinical Features
・ Fever
・ Cough
・ Fatigue
・ Anorexia
・ Shortness of breath
・ Myalgia
・ Other non-specific symptoms-
・ Sore throat, nasal congestion, headache, diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting.
・ Loss of smell (anosmia) or loss of taste (ageusia) preceding the onset of
respiratory symptoms.
・ Children might not report fever or cough as frequently as adults.
・ Clinical severity
- Mild disease
- Symptomatic patients meeting the case definition for COVID-19
without evidence of viral pneumonia or hypoxia.
- Moderate disease
- Adolescent or adult with clinical signs of pneumonia (fever, cough,
dyspnoea, fast breathing) but no signs of severe pneumonia, including
SpO2 ≥ 90% on room air.
- Child with clinical signs of non-severe pneumonia (cough or difficulty
breathing + fast breathing and/or chest indrawing) and no signs of
severe pneumonia.
- Fast breathing (in breaths/min): < 2 months: ≥ 60; 2–11 months: ≥ 50;
1–5 years: ≥ 40
- Severe disease
- Adolescent or adult with clinical signs of pneumonia (fever, cough,
dyspnoea, fast breathing) plus one of the following: respiratory rate >
30 breaths/min; severe respiratory distress; or SpO2 < 90% on room air.
- Child with clinical signs of pneumonia (cough or difficulty in
breathing) + at least one of the following:
- Central cyanosis or Sp O2 < 90%; severe respiratory distress (e.g. fast
breathing, grunting, very severe chest in-drawing); general danger
sign: inability to breastfeed or drink, lethargy or unconsciousness, or
convulsions (87).
- Fast breathing (in breaths/min): < 2 months: ≥ 60; 2–11 months: ≥ 50;
1–5 years: ≥ 40
- Critical disease
- Any one of the following
- Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
- Sepsis
- Septic shock
- Acute thromobosis i.e., pulmonary embolism, acute coronary
syndrome, acute stroke
- Multisystem inflammatory syndrome temporally associated with
COVID-19 in children and adults.
Risk factors associated with severe disease.
・ Age more than 60 years (increasing with age).
・ Underlying noncommunicable diseases (NCDs):
- Diabetes, hypertension, cardiac disease, chronic lung disease,
cerebrovascular disease, dementia, mental disorders, chronic kidney
disease, immunosuppression, obesity, and cancer.
・ In pregnancy,
- Increasing maternal age, high BMI, non-white ethnicity, chronic
conditions, and pregnancy specific conditions such as gestational
diabetes and pre-eclampsia.
- Smoking.
Diagnosis
・ Gold standard is viral nucleic acid (RNA) detection by polymerase chain
reaction.
・ Viral antigen detection
・ Detection of antibodies to the virus (not routinely recommended for
diagnosis)

INVESTIGATIONS OF CORONAVIRUS DISEASE (COVID-19)
Investigations
・ FBC & Differentials
・ Chest X-ray
・ Chest CT scan
・ Renal function tests
・ Blood gas analysis
・ C-reative protein, Lactate dehydrogenase, D-dimer and ferritin levels
・ Clotting profile
・ Immunological markers
・ Sputum analysis for respiratory pathogens
・ Blood culture
・ Liver function tests

COMPLICATIONS OF CORONAVIRUS DISEASE (COVID-19)
Complications
・ Thromboembolism-Stroke, deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, or acute coronary syndrome
・ Acute liver injury
・ Acute kidney injury
・ Acute cardiac injury
・ Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
・ Sepsis and septic shock
・ Acute respiratory failure
・ Secondary infection
・ Multiorgan failure

TREATMENT OF CORONAVIRUS DISEASE (COVID-19)
Non-drug Treatment
・ Implement infection prevention and control measures.
・ Decide on home-based care or hospital care depending on severity and
other factors.
・ Provide supportive care- alleviate symptoms, as necessary.
・ Manage co-morbidities such as hypertension and diabetes, etc.
・ For hospitalized patient:
- Provide supplemental oxygen in cases of hypoxaemia targeting SpO2 ≥
94%
- In patients with ARDS or respiratory failure consider non-invasive or
invasive mechanical ventilation
- Identify other co-infections and treat according to local guidelines.
Drug Treatment
・ Consider corticosteroids (i.e., dexamethasone, hydrocortisone, or
prednisone) for the treatment of patients with severe and critical COVID-
19; duration of treatment of 7-10 days.
・ Dexamethasone 6 mg daily (oral or IV)
・ Hydrocortisone 160 mg (i.e. 50 mg every 8 hours or 100 mg every 12
hours),
・ Prednisolone 40 mg daily
・ Methylprednisolone 32 mg (8 mg every 6 hours)
・ Consider thromoboprophylaxis for hospitalized severe and critical
COVID-19
- Preferable: Low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin) SC 40 mg
every 24 hours.
・ Manage Complications according to local guidelines.
Prevention
・ Non-pharmacological interventions
・ Vaccination