CUSHINGS SYNDROME
Introduction
Cushing syndrome is a constellation of features associated with prolonged
exposure to inappropriately high levels of plasma glucocorticoids.
The most common cause is from exogenous glucocorticoid use Endogenous
causes of Cushing's syndrome are rare.
Classification/ Aetiology:
・ ACTH- dependent
- Cushing's disease
- Ectopic ACTH Syndrome
- Macronodular Adrenal Hyperplasia
・ ACTH-independent causes:
- Cortisol-secreting adrenal tumour or hyperplasia
- Iatrogenic Cushing's Syndrome

CLINICAL FEATURES OF CUSHING'S SYNDROME 
・ Weight gain, moon facies, fat pads, truncal obesity;
・ Facial plethora, red- purple striae ecchymoses, facial hair, hirsutism and
male pattern balding in women, acne, Acanthosis nigricans, opportunistic
fungal infections, poor wound healing.
・ Ocular: Raised intraocular pressure, exophthalmos, Visual field defects-
・ Muscle weakness especially proximal myopathy
・ Menstrual irregularities- decreased libido, men- decreased libido and
impotence in men
・ Lethargy, depression, emotional liability, psychosis, diabetes mellitus, ,
loss of height, pathologic fractures, hypertension, discriminatory features -
reddish purple striae, plethora, proximal muscle weakness, bruising with
no obvious trauma, and unexplained osteoporosis.

INVESTIGATIONS OF CUSHING'S SYNDROME 
・ Electrolyte, Urea and Creatinine, FBS and FBC
・ Urine free cortisol (UFC; at least two measurements)
・ Late-night salivary cortisol (two measurements)
・ 1 mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test (DST)
・ Longer low-dose DST (2 mg/day for 48 hours)

Specific investigations
・ Morning plasma ACTH-
・ High-Dose DST
・ Inferior Petrosal Sinus Sampling and Selective Venous Catheterization
・ Imaging: CT/MRI scanning of pituitary and adrenals; scintigraphy

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES OF CUSHING'S SYNDROME 
・ Constitutional obesity
・ Other causes of weight gain
・ Pseudo cushings
・ Pregnancy
・ Depression
・ Bulimia
・ Alcoholism

TREATMENT OF CUSHING'S SYNDROME 
Treatment
・ Exclude known causes of weight gain through history and examination
・ Confirm diagnosis and differential diagnoses before initiating treatment
・ Remove any underlying cause e.g. iatrogenic Cushing Syndrome.
・ General principle is to reduce the level of plasma cortisol and treat any
symptoms and Complications
・ Surgical resection of the culprit tumour if patient qualifies.
・ Start with medical treatment and then surgery or continue medical
treatment as indicated.
Drug Treatment
・ Mifepristone
・ Adrenal steroid inhibitors
・ Metyrapone
・ Aminoglutethimide- commonly prescribed in combination with
metyrapone.
Surgery
・ Adrenalectomy or pituitary surgery
Radiotherapy
・ For failed surgery and/or patients not fit for surgery
Complications of Cushing's syndrome and its treatment
・ Diabetes mellitus
・ Osteoprosis and fractures
・ Hypopituitarism (compression of other corticotrophs)
・ Steroid psychosis
・ Hormone replacement
・ Lifelong glucocorticoid replacement with pituitary destruction or bilateral
adrenalectomy
・ Lifelong mineralocorticoid replacement is also necessary in those patients
who undergo bilateral adrenalectomy.
Prognosis
・ Favourable for adenomas as surgery is curative.
・ CS due to carcinoma and adrenal hyperplasia have worse prognosis