ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Introduction
Erectile dysfunction (ED) is the persistent inability to achieve and maintain an
erection sufficient for satisfactory sexual intercourse. It results from disorder in
any of the factors involved in the complex processes that lead to erection which
involves the brain, hormones, blood vessels, emotions, and muscles.
It can occur at any age, but is uncommon in boys, common in the elderly.By the
age of 45 years, most men have experienced ED at some time. Generally, 40%
of men experience some degree of ED at 40 years, and 70% at 70 years.
Complete ED occurs in approximately 5% of men at 40 years and 15% at 70
years.
Types of ED
・ Organic – Physical
・ Psychogenic- Emotion and mental health
・ Mixed – occasionally
Risk factors/Causes
・ Advanced age
・ Diabetes mellitus
・ Cardiovascular diseases e.g. hypertension, coronary heart disease
・ High cholesterol (dyslipidaemia)
・ Tobacco intake: smoking, snuffing
・ Recreational drug use: Indian hemp, cocaine etc
・ Depression and other psychiatric illnesses
・ Drugs: alpha methyl dopa, Beta blockers & Hydrochlorothiazide

CLINICAL FEATURES OF ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Clinical Features
・ Difficulty getting erection
・ Difficulty keeping an erection
・ Reduced sexual drive
・ History suggestive of possible causes- e.g. drugs, systemic diseases
・ Focused history to confirm it is ED and not any other sexual dysfunctions
(see Differential Diagnoses)
・ Focused physical examination to identify significant abnormalities, e.g.
gynaecomastia, penile deformity or plaques, impaired sensations etc

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES OF ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Differential Diagnoses
・ Ejaculatory Dysfunctions (premature ejaculation, delayed ejaculation,
anejaculation, anorgasmia)
・ Long refractory period
・ Decreased libido
・ Peyronie's Disease

COMPLICATIONS OF ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Complications
・ Psychological disturbance –stress and anxiety
・ Unsatisfactory sex life
・ Embarrassment and low esteem
・ Relationship problems
・ Infertility

INVESTIGATIONS OF ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Investigations
・ General
- FBC and ESR
- Urinalysis
- Blood glucose screening
- Blood lipid profile (Fasting)
- Hormone assay – Total and free testosterone, prolactin, FSH, LH
・Specific
- Nocturnal penile tumescence testing (Rigidscan)
- Colour Duplex Ultrasound – for suspected vascular cause.
- Cavernosogram – suspected venous leak

TREATMENT OF ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Treatment Goals
・ Achieve and sustain erection
Non-drug Treatment (non-active treatment):
・ Life-style and home remedies
- Quitting smoking,
- Losing excess weight
- Exercising regularly
- Reducing or stopping alcohol and hard drugs
- Couples or marriage counselling, if relation problem
Adjusting medications: Important part of ED treatment
・ alpha methyl dopa, Beta blockers & Hydrochlorothiazide cause ED
・ Ca channel blockers & ACEIs have no effect
Drug Treatment
First line active treatment
・ Oral phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (PDES-5): Sildenafil 25-100 mg daily
・ Adequate medical evaluation must be done before PDES-5 (or any OTC
drug for ED) is given.