FOREIGN BODIES IN THE AIRWAYS
Introduction
Children (most commonly) may aspirate pieces of play objects or food items
accidentally into the airway. This may present as serious emergency with
imminent asphyxia.

CLINICAL FEATURES OF FOREIGN BODIES IN THE AIRWAYS 
・ If object is arrested at laryngeal level, acute upper respiratory tract
obstruction with difficulty in breathing and stridor may occur immediately
or progressively.
・ Initial dyspnoea and cough may subside if the object passes down, but
symptoms may return later.
・ Sharp objects (e.g. fish bone or pins) may be impacted on the vocal cord
leading to oedema and progressive obstruction.
・ In severe cases, stridor, severe cyanosis and imminent asphyxia requiring
immediate intervention to prevent a fatal outcome may occur.
・ Small objects such as seeds may transverse the larynx and become arrested
in the trachea or bronchus. Vegetables such as peanuts may cause
inflammatory reactions such as pneumonitis.
・ Two-way stridor often occurs with tracheal foreign bodies
・ In the lower airways objects may remain for long periods, with unexplained
chest symptoms

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES OF FOREIGN BODIES IN THE AIRWAYS 
・ Differential Diagnoses
・ Acute laryngitis
・ Acute laryngeal oedema
・ Bronchopneumonia
・ Pulmonary tuberculosis

COMPLICATIONS OF FOREIGN BODIES IN THE AIRWAYS 
・ Life-threatening asphyxia
・ Lung collapse and atelectasis

INVESTIGATIONS OF FOREIGN BODIES IN THE AIRWAYS 
・ Radiograph of neck and chest

TREATMENT OF FOREIGN BODIES IN THE AIRWAYS 
Treatment Goals
・ To maintain the airway and adequate respiratory function
・ Remove the foreign object as expeditiously as possible
Non-drug Treatment
・ Immediate removal under anaesthesia by direct laryngoscopy or
bronchoscopy as appropriate.
・ Tracheostomy where necessary to maintain airway
Drug Treatment
・ Antibiotic prophylaxis if necessary (for 3 days)
- Amoxicillin
- Child: 6-12 years: 250 mg orally 12 hourly
- under 6 years: 125 mg orally 12 hourly
· Steroids
- Hydrocortisone (for pneumonitis)
- Child
- 1 month - 1 year: initially 25 mg by intravenous or intramuscular
injection q8hr;
- 1 - 6 years: initially 50 mg q8hr;
- 6 - 12 years: initially 100 mg q8hr;
- 12 - 18 years: initially 100 - 500 mg q8hr,
- adjusted in all age groups according to response
Supportive Measures
・ Oxygen
・ Steam inhalation/nebulizer
Prevention
・ Vigilant supervision of young children