RECURRENT APHTHOUS STOMATITIS (RAS)
Introduction
Recurrent Aphthous Stomatitis is the most common ulcerative disease affecting
the oral mucosa. It occurs mostly in healthy individuals and has atypical clinical
presentation in immunocompromised individuals. The aetiology of RAS is still
unknown, but several local, systemic, immunologic, genetic, allergic,
nutritional, and microbial factors, as well as immunosuppressive drugs, have
been proposed as causative agents.

Feature                Minor         Major         Herpetiform
---------------------------------------------------------------
Gender predilection    M=F           M=F           M>F
Age of onset (yrs)     5–19          10–19         20–29
Number of ulcers       1–5           1–10          10–100
Size of ulcers (mm)    <10           >10           1–2 (larger if coalesced)
Duration (days)        4–14          >30           <30
Recurrence (months)    1–4           <1            <1
Site predilection      Floor mouth   Lips, palate  Pharynx, floor mouth
Permanent scarring     Unusual       Common       

TREATMENT OF MILD-TO-MODERATE CASES OF RECURRENT APHTHOUS STOMATITIS (RAS)
• Triamcinolone acetonide in dental paste 0.1%; Disp. 5-g tube
• Sig. coat the lesion with a thin film after each meal and at bedtime.
Drug Treatment
• Dexamethasone oral solution or elixir 0.5 mg/5 ml; disp. 240 ml
• Sig. rinse with 1 teaspoon (5 ml) for 2 min, four times a day and expectorate.
Do not eat or drink for 30 min after rinsing
Treatment for Severe Cases
• Fluocinonide 0.05% gel; Disp. 15-g tube
• Sig. Apply a thin layer to the ulcer after meals and at bedtime
• Discontinue use of topical steroids when lesions become asymptomatic.
Other topical steroid preparations (cream, gel, rinse, ointment) are
available.
In general, creams are not used intraorally because of very poor mucosal
adherence. Many topical steroids come with a warning that they are for external
use only. However, several of these agents have been used successfully for
managing recurrent aphthous ulcerations.
Notable Adverse Drug Reactions, Contraindications and Caution
• Prolonged use of topical steroids (longer than 2 weeks of continuous use)
may result in mucosal atrophy and secondary candidiasis and may increase
the potential for systemic absorption. It may be necessary to prescribe
antifungal therapy with steroids use in some patients