TYPHOID FEVER (ENTERIC FEVER)
Introduction
A multisystemic illness caused primarily by Salmonella enterica serotype typhi
and, to a lesser extent, S. enterica serotypes paratyphi A, B, and C.
It is usually spread through contaminated food or water.
Once Salmonella typhi bacteria are eaten or drunk, they multiply and spread
into the bloodstream.
Risk is higher in populations that lack access to safe water and adequate
sanitation.
Humans are the only reservoir fo salmonella.
Incidence of chronic carriage is higher among women and persons with biliary
abnormalities: gall stones, carcinoma of the gall bladder; also higher in persons
with gastrointestinal malignancies.

CLINCAL FEATURES OF TYPHOID FEVER (ENTERIC FEVER)
Clinical Features
・ Incubation period ranges from 3 - 21 days
・ High grade fever (38.80 C to 40.50C)
・ A prodrome of non-specific symptoms:
- Chills
- Headache
- Anorexia
- Cough
- Weakness
- Sore throat
- Dizziness
- Muscle pains
- Gastro-intestinal:
- Diarrhoea or constipation
- Abdominal pain
- Rash (rose spots)
- Hepato-splenomegaly
- Epistaxis
- Relative bradycardia
Complications
・ Neuropsychiatric symptoms
・ Intestinal perforation
・ Gastro-intestinal haemorrhage
・ Pancreatitis
・ Hepatitis
・ Splenic abscesses
・ Meningitis
・ Nephritis
・ Pneumonia
・ Osteomyelitis
・ Chronic carrier state

INVESTIGATIONS OF  TYPHOID FEVER (ENTERIC FEVER)
Investigations
・ A positive culture is the 'gold standard' for the diagnosis of typhoid fever.
・ Specimens for culture may be obtained from the blood, stool, urine, bone
marrow; gastric and intestinal secretions.
・ There are no diagnostic tests other than positive cultures.
Non-specific
・ Full Blood Count
・ Leucopenia, neutropenia, leucocytosis can develop early, especially in
children; late if complicated by intestinal perforation or secondary
infection
・ Liver function tests: values may be elevated.
・ Electrocardiography:
- ST and T wave abnormalities may be present.
・ Serological tests
・ Widal test gives high rates of false positives and negatives

TREATMENT OF TYPHOID FEVER (ENTERIC FEVER)
Treatment Goals
・ Eliminate S. typhi and S. paratyphi
・ Prevent Complications.
・ Prevent chronic carrier status.
Drug Treatment
・ Antibiotics
- at least 2 - 4 minutes; 2 - 4 g daily in severe infection; may also be given
by intravenous infusion
- Child:
- neonate, 20 - 50 mg/kg daily by intravenous injection over 60
minutes
- infant and child under 50 kg: 20 - 50 mg/kg daily; up to 80 mg/kg in
severe infection;
- over 50 kg: adult dose
- Doses of 50 mg/kg and above should be given by intravenous
infusion only
- Intramuscular doses over 1 g should be divided between more than
one site; single intravenous doses above 1 g should be given by
intravenous infusion only
Or:
- Ciprofloxacin:
- Adult: 500 - 750 mg orally every 12 hours
Or
- 200 - 400 mg every 12 hours by intravenous infection over 30 - 60
minutes
- Child and adolescent: not recommended.
・ Parenteral fluid administration
・ Treat Complications.
Notable Adverse Drug Reactions, Contraindications and Caution
・ Ciprofloxacin:
- Diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, headache (which
are themselves features of the disease)
- Should be given with caution in pregnancy and during breastfeeding.
- Not recommended for children or adolescents
Non-drug Treatment
・ Nursing care
・ Enteral or parenteral nutrition
Prevention
・ Eliminate Salmonella by effective treatment of cases, improved sewage
management, improved water treatment and improved food hygiene
(production, transit, storage, and utilization)
・ Typhoid immunization is recommended for those at risk.
・ Not a substitute for scrupulous personal and environmental hygiene
・ Identify, and treat chronic carriers with amoxicillin or ciprofloxacin daily
for 4 - 6 weeks.
・ In patients with urolithiasis and schistosomiasis appropriate treatment
should be instituted
・ Correct anatomic abnormalities associated with the disease surgically.
・ Cholecystectomy may be required in some cases